.de F
.B
.if !"\\$1"" \&\\$1 \\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6
..
.de L
.B
.if !"\\$1"" \&\\$1 \\$2 \\$3 \\$4 \\$5 \\$6
..
.de FR
.BR "\\$1" "\\$2" "\\$3" "\\$4" "\\$5" "\\$6"
..
.de LR
.BR "\\$1" "\\$2" "\\$3" "\\$4" "\\$5" "\\$6"
..
.de CW
.ft B
..
.\" This is gross but it avoids relying on internal implementation details
.\" of the -man macros.
.de TF
.IP "" \w'\fB\\$1\ \ \fP'u
.PD0
..
.de EX
.CW
.nf
..
.de EE
.fi
..
.\" delete above this point if your system has F, L, FR, LR, CW and TF macros
.TH FRINIT 3G
.SH NAME
frinit, frsetrects, frclear, frcharofpt, frptofchar, frinsert, frdelete, frselect, frselectp, frselectf, frgetmouse \- frames of text
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B
#include <u.h>
.B
#include <libc.h>
.B
#include <libg.h>
.B
#include <frame.h>
.PP
.B
void  frinit(Frame *f, Rectangle r, Font *ft, Bitmap *b);
.PP
.B
void  frsetrects(Frame *f, Rectangle r, Bitmap *b);
.PP
.B
void  frclear(Frame *f);
.PP
.B
ulong frcharofpt(Frame *f, Point pt);
.PP
.B
Point frptofchar(Frame *f, ulong p);
.PP
.B
void  frinsert(Frame *f, Rune *r0, Rune *r1, ulong p);
.PP
.B
int   frdelete(Frame *f, ulong p0, ulong p1);
.PP
.B
void  frselect(Frame *f, Mouse *m);
.PP
.B
void  frselectp(Frame *f, Fcode fc);
.PP
.B
void  frselectf(Frame *f, Point p0, Point p1, Fcode c);
.PP
.B
extern void frgetmouse(void);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
This library supports
.I frames
of editable text in a single font on bitmap displays, such as in
.IR sam (1),
.IR 8\(12 (1),
and
.IR 9term (1).
Frames may hold any character except NUL.
Long lines are folded and tabs are at fixed intervals.
.PP
The user-visible data structure, a
.BR Frame ,
is defined in
.BR <frame.h> :
.IP
.EX
.ta 6n +\w'Rectangle 'u +\w'lastlinefull;   'u
typedef struct Frame Frame;
struct Frame
{
	Font	*font;	/* of chars in the frame */
	Bitmap	*b;	/* on which frame appears */
	Rectangle	r;	/* in which text appears */
	Rectangle	entire;	/* of full frame */
	Frbox	*box;
	ulong	p0, p1;	/* selection */
	short	left;	/* left edge of text */
	ushort	nbox, nalloc;
	ushort	maxtab;	/* max size of tab, in pixels */
	ushort	nchars;	/* # runes in frame */
	ushort	nlines;	/* # lines with text */
	ushort	maxlines;	/* total # lines in frame */
	ushort	lastlinefull;	/* last line fills frame */
	ushort	modified;	/* changed since frselect() */
};
.EE
.PP
.B Frbox
is an internal type and is not used by the interface.
.B P0
and
.B p1
may be changed by the application provided the selection routines are called
afterwards to maintain a consistent display.
.I Maxtab
determines the size of tab stops.
.I Frinit
sets it to 8 times the width of a
.B 1
character in the font;
it may be changed before any text is added to the frame.
The other elements of the structure are maintained by the library and
should not be modified directly.
.PP
There are no routines in the library to allocate
.BR Frames ;
instead the interface assumes that
.B Frames
will be components of larger structures.
.I Frinit
prepares the
.B Frame
.I f
so characters drawn in it will appear
in the single
.B Font
.I ft.
It then calls
.B frsetrects
to initialize the geometry for the
.B Frame.
The
.B Bitmap
.I b
is where the
.B Frame
is to be drawn;
.B Rectangle
.I r
defines the limit of the portion of the
.B Bitmap
the text will occupy.
The
.B Bitmap
pointer
may be null, allowing the other routines to be called to maintain the
associated data structure in, for example, an obscured window.
.PP
.I Frclear
frees the internal structures associated with
.I f,
permitting another
.I frinit
or
.I frsetrects
on the
.BR Frame .
If
.I f
is to be deallocated, the associated
.B Font
and
.B Bitmap
must be freed separately.
.PP
To reshape a
.B Frame,
use
.I frclear
and
.I frinit
and then
.I frinsert
(q.v.) to recreate the display.
If a
.B Frame
is being moved but not reshaped, that is, if the shape of its containing
rectangle is unchanged, it is sufficient to
.IR bitblt (3)
the containing rectangle from the old to the new location and then call
.I frsetrects
to establish the new geometry.
No redrawing is necessary.
.PP
.B Frames
hold text as runes,
not as bytes.
.I Frptofchar
returns the location of the upper left corner of the
.I p'th
rune in the
.B Frame
.I f.
If
.I f
holds fewer than
.I p
runes,
.I frptofchar
returns the location of the upper right corner of the last character in
.I f.
.I Frcharofpt
is the inverse: it
returns the index of the closest rune whose image's upper left corner
is up and to the left of
.I pt.
.PP
.I Frinsert
inserts into
.B Frame
.I f
starting at rune index
.I p
the runes between
.I r0
and
.I r1.
.PP
.I Frdelete
deletes from the
.B Frame
the text between
.I p0
and
.I p1.
.PP
.I Frselect
tracks the mouse to select a contiguous string of text in the
.BR Frame .
When called, mouse button 1 should be depressed.
It will return when the button is released and will set
.IB f ->p0
and
.IB f ->p1
to the selected range of text.
.I Frselectf
and
.I Frselectp
modify the display of the selected text.
.I Frselectf
highlights the text between
.I p0
and
.I p1
(which must have been returned by
.IR frptofochar )
using
.B bitblt
in mode
.I c.
.I Frselectp
is similar but highlights the text from
.IB f ->p0
to
.IB f ->p1 .
Neither
.I frselectf
nor
.I frselectp
modifies
.IB f ->p0
or
.IB f ->p1 .
.PP
Upon return from
.I frinsert
or
.I frdelete,
the display will be consistent but
.IB f ->p0
and
.IB f ->p1
may not point to the desired selection.
It may be necessary to adjust the selection and use
.I frselectf
or
.I frselectp
to fix the display.
.PP
.I Frgetmouse
must be provided by the application;
.I frselect
calls it to get mouse updates.
Each call to
.I frgetmouse
should update
the
.B Mouse
structure pointed to by
.I frselect's
argument
.I m.
.I Frgetmouse
should block until the mouse status has changed.
.PP
The text within frames
is not directly addressable; instead frames are designed to work alongside
another structure that holds the text.
The typical application is to display a section of a longer document such
as a text file or terminal session.
Only the text that is visible is held by the
.BR Frame ;
the application must check
.BR maxlines ,
.BR nlines ,
and
.B lastlinefull
to determine, for example, whether new text needs to be appended
at the end of the
.B Frame
after calling
.BR frdelete . 
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR graphics (3),
.IR bitblt (3),
.IR event (3),
.IR cachechar (3).
